# Dynamic choice modeling

Even though I have written it many many times, the myriad of notations can still be confusing and call for some clarifications.

## Reward function 
$$u(s, a)$$

## Total reward function
$$v(s, a, \epsilon) = u(s, a) + \epsilon_a$$

## Continuation reward function
$$\tilde{u}(s, a) = u(s, a) +  \beta E_{(s_{t+1},\epsilon')\mid (a, s, \epsilon)} V(s_{t+1},\epsilon') $$

## Continuation total reward function
$$\tilde{v}(s, a , \epsilon)  = \tilde{u}(s, a) + \epsilon_a$$

## Value function 
$$V(s, \epsilon) = \max_{a} \tilde{v}(s, a , \epsilon)$$

## Expected value function
$$\bar{V}(s) = \int_{\epsilon} V(s, \epsilon) dF(\epsilon)$$

## Conditional independence assumption
Thanks to the following assumption, 
$$f((s_{t+1}, \epsilon')\mid (a, s, \epsilon)) = f(\epsilon')f(s_{t+1}\mid (a, s))$$
we have the relationship between value function and expected value function:

$$ \bar{V}(s) = \int_{\epsilon} \left [\underbrace{\underbrace{
 \max_{a}u(s, a) + \beta  E_{s_{t+1}\mid (a, s)} \bar{V}(s_{t+1})}_{\tilde{u}(s,a)} + \epsilon_a}_{\tilde{v}(s,a,\epsilon)}\right] dF(\epsilon)$$

which is used to sovle for the expected value function by solving for the fixed point of the following operator.

# Dynamic choice estimation

## Derive expression including CCP

First we need to rewrite the expected value function in terms of CCP

### Approach 1

$$\bar{V}(s) = \sum_{a} \Pr(a\mid s) \left [u(s, a) + E(\epsilon_a|s,a)+\beta E_{s_{t+1}\mid (a, s)} \bar{V}(s_{t+1})\right]$$
$$ = \sum_{a} \Pr(a\mid s) \left [\tilde{u}(s,a) + \gamma - \ln \Pr(a\mid s) \right]$$
Because we have 
$$ E(\epsilon_a|s,a) = \frac{1}{\Pr(a\mid s)} \int \epsilon_a 1\left\{\tilde{u}(s,a) + \epsilon_a > \tilde{u}(s,a')+\epsilon_{a'} \right\}dF(\epsilon)$$
And in the case of T1EV, 
$$ E(\epsilon_a|s,a) = \gamma - \ln \Pr(a\mid s)$$

### Approach 2
$$\bar{V}(s) = \int \max_{a} \left [u(s, a) +\epsilon_a+\beta E_{s_{t+1}\mid (a, s)} \bar{V}(s_{t+1})\right] dF(\epsilon)$$
$$ = \gamma + \ln \sum_{a'} \exp\left(\tilde{u}(s,a') \right)$$
At the same time, we have
$$ \Pr(a\mid s) = \frac{\exp(\tilde{u}(s,a))}{\sum_{a'} \exp(\tilde{u}(s,a'))}$$
Then we can rewrite the expected value function in terms of CCP of a particular action $a$ as follows:
$$ \bar{V}(s) = \gamma + \ln \exp(\tilde{u}(s,a)) - \ln \Pr(a\mid s)$$
$$ = \tilde{u}(s,a) - \ln \Pr(a\mid s)+ \gamma $$ 

**Remark** How to show the two approaches are equivalent? 

Comparing 
$$\sum_{a} \Pr(a\mid s) \left [\tilde{u}(s,a) + \gamma - \ln \Pr(a\mid s) \right]$$
with 
$$\tilde{u}(s,a) - \ln \Pr(a\mid s)+ \gamma$$

Notice that 
$$ \ln \Pr(a\mid s) = \tilde{u}(s,a) - \ln \sum_{a'} \exp\left(\tilde{u}(s,a') \right)$$
The proof is done.

## Finite horizon case

### Make use of terminal action 

#### Time $T$
In terminal action, we have that 
$$ \tilde{u}_T(s_T,a^*) = u_T(s_T,a^*) $$ 
Also, the CCP relationship is 
$$ \bar{V}_T(s_T) = {u}_T(s_T,a^*) - \ln \Pr(a^*\mid s_T)+ \gamma$$

#### Time $T-1$
Then at $T-1$, we have
$$\tilde{u}_{T-1}(s_{T-1},a) = u_{T-1}(s_{T-1},a) + \beta E_{s_{T}\mid (a, s_{T-1})} \bar{V}_T(s_T)$$
$$ = u_{T-1}(s_{T-1},a) + \beta E_{s_{T}\mid (a, s_{T-1})} \left [ {u}_T(s_{T},a^*) - \ln \Pr(a^*\mid s_{T})+ \gamma \right]$$

Therefore, in time $T-1$, the model is essentially a static model with 
$$\tilde{u}_{T-1}(s_{T-1},a) = u_{T-1}(s_{T-1},a) + \text{correction term}$$
Then the expected value function can be expressed as
$$\bar{V}_{T-1}(s_{T-1}) = \tilde{u}_{T-1}(s_{T-1},a') - \ln \Pr_{T-1}(a'\mid s_{T-1} )+ \gamma$$

#### Time $T-2$

Then at time $T-2$, we have
$$\tilde{u}_{T-2}(s_{T-2},a) = u_{T-2}(s_{T-2},a) + \beta E_{s_{T-1}\mid (a, s_{T-2})} \bar{V}_{T-1}(s_{T-1})$$
Similarly, we can roll backward.

### Make use of renewal action at time $t+1$

#### Time $t$
$$\tilde{u}_t(s_t,a) = u_t(s_t,a) + \beta E_{s_{t+1}\mid (a, s)} \bar{V}_{t+1}(s_{t+1})$$

At time $t+1$, there is a renewal action $a^*$, then we can express 
$$ \bar{V}_{t+1}(s_{t+1}) = \tilde{u}_{t+1}(s_{t+1},a^*) - \ln \Pr_{t+1}(a^*\mid s_{t+1})+ \gamma$$

#### Time $t+1$
Pick the renewal action $a^*$, we have
$$\tilde{u}_{t+1}(s_{t+1},a^*) = u_{t+1}(s_{t+1},a^*) + \beta E_{s_{t+2}\mid (a^*, s_{t+1})} \bar{V}_{t+2}(s_{t+2})$$

Renewal action means some kind of independence, let us write it out
$$\int (\tilde{u}_{t+1}(s_{t+1},a^*) - \ln \Pr_{t+1}(a^*\mid s_{t+1})+ \gamma )  d F_{s_{t+1}\mid (s,a)}(s_{t+1})$$
Plugging in $\tilde{u}_{t+1}(s_{t+1},a^*)$ where 
$$\tilde{u}_{t+1}(s_{t+1},a^*) = u_{t+1}(s_{t+1},a^*) + \beta E_{s_{t+2}\mid (a^*, s_{t+1})} \bar{V}_{t+2}(s_{t+2})$$
Therefore, we have a double integral 
$$\int_{s_{t+1}} \int_{s_{t+2}}  \bar{V}_{t+2}(s_{t+2}) d F_{s_{t+2}\mid (a^*, s_{t+1})}(s_{t+2}) d F_{s_{t+1}\mid (s,a)}(s_{t+1})$$

The idea of renewal action is that when we take action $a^*$, it doesn't matter what the state $s_{t+1}$ is. 
$$F_{s_{t+2}\mid (a^*, s_{t+1})}(s_{t+2}) = F_{s_{t+2}\mid (a^*)}(s_{t+2})$$
This is the idea.


Therefore, let's say at time $t$, take the difference between two actions $a_1$ and $a_2$, would give
$$ \int_{s_{t+1}} \int_{s_{t+2}}  \bar{V}_{t+2}(s_{t+2}) d F_{s_{t+2}\mid (a^*, s_{t+1})}(s_{t+2}) d F_{s_{t+1}\mid (s,a_1)}(s_{t+1})$$ 
$$-\int_{s_{t+1}} \int_{s_{t+2}}  \bar{V}_{t+2}(s_{t+2}) d F_{s_{t+2}\mid (a^*, s_{t+1})}(s_{t+2}) d F_{s_{t+1}\mid (s,a_2)}(s_{t+1})$$

You couldn't combine the inner integral because $dF_{s_{t+1}\mid (s,a_1)}(s_{t+1})$ and $dF_{s_{t+1}\mid (s,a_2)}(s_{t+1})$ are different.

However, since 
$$\int_{s_{t+2}}  \bar{V}_{t+2}(s_{t+2}) d F_{s_{t+2}\mid (a^*, s_{t+1})}(s_{t+2}) = \int_{s_{t+2}}  \bar{V}_{t+2}(s_{t+2}) d F_{s_{t+2}\mid (a^*)}(s_{t+2})$$ 
has nothing to do with $s_{t+1}$, we can take it out of the integral. 
 
Then the difference becomes zero. Yeah.

### Make use of renewal action at time $t+k$ 
Then the idea is that we can keep rolling forward until a period where there is a renewal action. For example, at time $t+k$, we can pick a renewal action. Then the integral term of $\bar{V}_{t+k+1}(s_{t+k+1})$ can be removed therefore we are free from estimating the expected value function.

And everything are expressed in terms of $u$ and $\Pr$ without $\bar{V}$.